CHAPTER XXXI.
My home, then, when I at last find a home, is a cottage, a little room with white-washed
walls and a sanded floor, containing four painted chairs and a table, a clock, a cupboard,
with two or three plates and dishes, and a set of teethings in delft. Above, a chamber
of the same dimensions as the kitchen, with a deal bedstead, and chest of drawers, small,
yet too large to be filled with my scanty wardrobe, though the kindness of my gentle
and generous friends has increased that by a modest stock of such things as are necessary.
It is evening. I have dismissed, with the fee of an orange, the little orphan who serves
as a handmaid. I am sitting alone on the hearth. This morning the village school opened. I
had twenty scholars, but three of the number can read, none write or cipher, several knit,
and a few sew a little. They speak with the broadest accent of the district. At present
they and I have a difficulty in understanding each other's language. Some of them are unmannered,
rough, intractable, as well as ignorant, but others are docile, have a wish to learn, and
a disposition that pleases me. I must not forget that these coarsely clad little peasants
are of flesh and blood as good as the scions of gentlest genealogy, and that the germs
of native excellence, refinement, intelligence, kind feeling, are as likely to exist in their
hearts as in those of the best born. My duty will be to develop these germs. Surely I shall
some happiness in discharging that office. Much enjoyment I do not expect in the life
opening before me, yet it will, doubtless, if I regulate my mind, and exert my powers
as I ought, yield me enough to live on from day to day. Was I very gleeful, settled, content,
during the hours I passed in yonder bare, humble classroom this morning and afternoon?
Not to deceive myself, I must reply, no. I felt desolate to a degree. I felt, yes, idiot
that I am. I felt degraded. I doubted I had taken a step which sank instead of rising
me in the scale of social existence. I was weakly dismayed at the ignorance, the poverty,
the coarseness of all I heard and saw round me. But let me not hate and despise myself
too much for these feelings. I know them to be wrong. That is a great step gained. I shall
strive to overcome them. To-morrow, I trust, I shall get the better of them partially,
and in a few weeks, perhaps, they will be quite subdued. In a few months, it is possible
the happiness of seeing progress, and a change for the better in my scholars, may substitute
gratification for disgust.
Meantime, let me ask myself one question. Which is better? To have surrendered to temptation,
listened to passion, made no painful effort, no struggle, but to have sunk down in the
silken snare, fallen asleep on the flowers covering it, wakening in a southern clime
amongst the luxuries of a pleasure villa, to have been now living in France, Mr. Rochester's
mistress, delirious with his love half my time, for he would, oh yes, he would have
loved me well for a while. He did love me. No one will ever love me so again. I shall
never more know the sweet homage given to beauty, youth, and grace, for never to anyone
else shall I seem to possess these charms. He was fond and proud of me. It is what no
man besides will ever be.
But where am I wandering, and what am I saying, and above all feeling? Whether is it better,
I ask, to be a slave to a fool's paradise at Marseilles, fevered with delusive bliss
one hour, suffocating with the bitterest tears of remorse and shame the next? Or to be a
village a school mistress, free and honest, in a breezy mountain nook in the healthy heart
of England? Yes, I feel now that I was right when I adhered to principle and law, and scorned
and crushed the insane promptings of a frenzied moment. God directed me to a correct choice.
I thank his providence for the guidance. Having brought my eventide musings to this point,
I rose, went to my door, and looked at the sunset of the harvest day, and at the quiet
fields before my cottage, which, with the school, was distant half a mile from the village.
The birds were singing their last strains. The air was mild and dew was balm. While I
looked, I thought myself happy, and was surprised to find myself air-long weeping. And why?
For the doom which had roughed me from adhesion to my master, for him I was no more to see.
For the desperate grief and fatal fury, consequences of my departure, which might now, perhaps,
be dragging him from the path of right, too far to leave hope of ultimate restoration
thither. At this thought, I turned my face aside from the lovely sky of Eve and lonely
vale of Morton. I say lonely, for in that bend of it, visible to me, there was no building
apparent, save the church and the parsonage, half hidden trees, and, quite at the extremity,
the roof of Vale Hall, where the rich Mr. Oliver and his daughter lived. I hid my eyes,
and linked my head against the stone frame of my door. But soon a slight noise near the
wicket which, shut in my tiny garden from the meadow beyond, it made me look up. A dog,
old Carlo, Mr. Rivers's pointer, as I saw in a moment, was pushing the gate with his
nose, and St. John himself leaned upon it with folded arms. His brow knit, his gaze
grave almost to displeasure fixed on me. I asked him to come in.
No, I cannot stay. I have only brought you a little parcel my sister's left for you.
I think it contains a color box, pencils, and paper. I approached to take it. A welcome
gift it was. He examined my face, I thought, with austerity as I came near. The traces
of tears were doubtless very visible upon it.
Have you found your first day's work harder than you expected? he asked.
Oh, no, on the contrary. I think in time I shall get on with my scholars very well. But
perhaps your accommodations, your cottage, your furniture, have disappointed your expectations.
They are, in truth, scanty enough, but—
I interrupted. My cottage is clean and weatherproof, my furniture sufficient and commodious. All
I see has made me thankful, not despondent. I am not absolutely such a fool and sensualist
as to regret the absence of a carpet, a sofa, and silver plate. Besides, five weeks ago
I had nothing. I was an outcast, a beggar, a vagrant. Now I have acquaintance, a home,
a business. I wonder at the goodness of God, the generosity of my friends, the bounty of
my lot. I do not repine. But you feel solitude and oppression? The little house there behind
you is dark and empty. I have hardly had time yet to enjoy a sense of tranquillity, much
less to grow impatient under one of loneliness.
Very well. I hope you feel the content you express. At any rate, your good sense will
tell you that it is too soon yet to yield to the vacillating fears of Lot's wife. What
you had left before I saw you, of course, I do not know. But I counsel you to resist
firmly every temptation which would incline you to look back. Pursue your present career
steadily—for some months, at least.
It is what I mean to do, I answered. St. John continued. It is hard work to control the
workings of inclination and turn the bent of nature, but that it may be done I know
from experience. God has given us, in a measure, the power to make our own fate, and when our
energies seem to demand a sustenance they cannot get, when our will strains after a
path we may not follow, we need neither starve from inanation nor stand still in despair.
We have but to seek another nourishment for the mind, as strong as the forbidden food
it longed to taste, and perhaps purer, and to hew out for the adventurous foot a road
as direct and broad as the one fortune has blocked up against us, if rougher than it.
A year ago I was myself intensely miserable, because I thought I had made a mistake in
entering the ministry. Its uniform duties wearied me to death. I burnt for the more
active life of the world, for the more exciting toils of a literary career, for the destiny
of an artist, author, orator, something rather than that of a priest, yes, the heart of a
politician, of a soldier, of a votary of glory, a lover of renown, a luster after power beat
under my curate surplus. I considered. My life was so wretched it must be changed or
die. After a season of darkness and struggling, light broke and relief fell. My cramped existence
all at once spread out to a plain without bounds. My powers heard a call from heaven to rise,
gather their full strength, spread their wings, and mount beyond ken. God has an errand for me,
to bear which afar, to deliver it well, skill and strength, courage and eloquence, the best
qualifications of soldier, statesman and orator were all needed. For these all center in the good
missionary. A missionary I resolved to be. From that moment my state of mind changed,
the fetters dissolved and dropped from every faculty, leaving nothing of bondage but its
galling soreness, which time can only heal. My father, indeed, imposed the determination,
but since his death I have not a legitimate obstacle to contend with. Some affairs settled,
a successor for Morton provided, an entanglement or two of the feelings broken through or cut
asunder, a last conflict with human weakness, in which I know I shall overcome, because I have
vowed that I will overcome. And I leave Europe for the East. He said this in his peculiar subdued,
yet emphatic voice, looking when he had ceased speaking not at me, but at the setting sun,
at which I looked, too. Both he and I had our backs towards the path, leading up the
field to the wicket. We had heard no step on that grass-grown track. The water running in
the vale was the one lulling sound of the hour and scene. We might well then start when a gay
voice, sweet as a silver bell, exclaimed, Good evening, Mr. Rivers. And good evening, old Carlo.
Your dog is quicker to recognize his friends than you are, sir. He pricked his ears and
wagged his tail when I was at the bottom of the field. And you have your back towards me now.
It was true. Though Mr. Rivers had started at the first of those musical accents,
as if a thunderbolt had split a cloud over his head, he stood yet, at the close of the sentence,
in the same attitude in which the speaker had surprised him. His arm resting on the gate,
his face directed towards the West. He turned at last with measured deliberation. A vision,
as it seemed to me, had risen at his side. There appeared, within three feet of him,
a form clad in pure white, a youthful graceful form, full yet fine in contour, and when,
after bending to caress Carlo, it lifted up its head and threw back a long veil,
there bloomed under his glance a face of perfect beauty. Perfect beauty is a strong expression,
but I do not retrace or qualify it. As sweet features as ever the temperate clime of Albion
moulded, as pure hues of rose and lily as ever her humid gales and vapoury skies generated and
screened justified in this instance the term, no charm was wanting, no defect was perceptible.
The young girl had regular and delicate lineaments, eyes shaped and coloured as we see them in lovely
pictures, large and dark and full, the long and shadowy eyelash which encircles a fine eye
with so soft a fascination, the penciled brow which gives such clearness, the white smooth forehead
which adds such repose to the livelier beauties of tint and ray, the cheek oval fresh and smooth,
the lips fresh too, ruddy, healthy, sweetly formed, the even and gleaming teeth without flaw,
the small dimpled chin, the ornament of rich plenteous tresses, all advantages, in short,
which, combined, realised the ideal of beauty were fully hers. I wondered as I looked at this
fair creature, I admired her with my whole heart. Nature had surely formed her in a partial mood,
and forgetting her usual stinted stepmother, Dole of Gifts, had endowed this, her darling,
with a grand dame's bounty. What did St. John Rivers think of this earthly angel?
I naturally asked myself that question as I saw him turn to her and look at her,
and as naturally I sought the answer to the inquiry in his countenance. He had already
withdrawn his eye from the parry, and was looking at a humble tuft of daisies which grew by the
wicket. A lovely evening, but late for you to be out alone, he said, as he crushed the snowy heads
of the closed flowers with his foot. Oh, I only come home from S. She mentioned the name of a large
town, some twenty miles distant, this afternoon. Papa told me you had opened your school, and that
the new mistress was come, and so I put on my bonnet after tea, and ran up the valley to see her.
This is she, pointing to me. It is, said St. John. Do you think you shall like Morton?
She asked of me, with a direct and naïve simplicity of tone and manner,
pleasing, if childlike. I hope I shall. I have many inducements to do so.
Did you find your scholars as attentive as you expected?
Quite. Do you like your house?
Very much. Have I furnished it nicely?
Very nicely, indeed. And made a good choice of an attendant for you in Alice Wood?
You have, indeed. She is teachable and handy.
This, then, I thought, is Miss Oliver, the heiress, favoured, it seems, in the gifts of fortune,
as well as in those of nature. What happy combination of the planets presided over her
birth, I wonder? I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes, she added. It will be a change
for me to visit you now and then. And I like a change. Mr. Rivers, I have been so gay during
my visit to S. Last night, or rather this morning, I was dancing till two o'clock. The Nth Regiment
are stationed there since the riots. And the officers are the most agreeable men in the world.
They put all our young knife-grinders and scissor-merchants to shame.
It seemed to me that Mr. St. John's underlip protruded, and his upper lip curled a moment.
His mouth certainly looked a good deal compressed, and the lower part of his face unusually stern and
square, as the laughing girl gave him this information. He lifted his gaze, too, from the
daisies and turned it on her. An unsmiling, a searching, a meaning gaze it was. She answered it
with a second laugh, and laughter well became her youth, her roses, her dimples, her bright eyes.
As he stood mute and grave, she again felt caressing Carlo.
Poor Carlo loves me, said she. He is not stern and distant to his friends, and if he could speak,
he would not be silent. As she patted the dog's head, bending with native grace before his young
and austere master, I saw a glow rise to that master's face. I saw his solemn eye melt with
sudden fire, and flicker with resistless emotion. Flushed and kindled thus, he looked nearly as
beautiful for a man as she for a woman. His chest heaved once, as if his large heart, weary of
despotic constriction, had expanded, despite the will, and made a vigorous bound for the attainment
of liberty. But he curbed it, I think, as a resolute rider would curb a rearing steed. He
responded neither by word nor movement to the gentle advances made him.
"'Papa says you never come to see us now,' continued Miss Oliver, looking up.
"'You are quite a stranger at Vale Hall. He is alone this evening, and not very well.
Will you return with me and visit him?'
"'It is not a seasonable hour to intrude on Mr. Oliver,' answered St. John.
"'Not a seasonable hour, but I declare it is. It is just the hour when Papa most wants company,
when the works are closed, and he has no business to occupy him. Now, Mr. Rivers, do come. Why are
you so very shy, and so very somber?' She filled up the hiatus, his silence left by a reply of her
own. "'I forgot,' she exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled head, as if shocked at herself.
"'I am so giddy and thoughtless. Do excuse me. It had slipped my memory that you have good reasons
to be indisposed for joining in my chatter. Diana and Mary have left you, and Morehouse is shut up,
and you are so lonely. I am sure I pity you. Do come and see Papa.'
"'Not to-night, Miss Rosamond, not to-night.'
Mr. St. John spoke almost like an automaton. Himself only knew the effort it cost him thus to
refuse. "'Well, if you are so obstinate, I will leave you, for I dare not stay any longer. The
dew begins to fall. Good evening.' She held out her hand. He just touched it.
"'Good evening,' he repeated in a voice low and hollow as an echo. She turned, but in a moment
returned. "'Are you well?' she asked. Well might she put the question. His face was blanched as her
head fell down. "'Quite well,' he enunciated, and with a bow he left the gate. She went one way, he
another. She turned twice to gaze after him, as she tripped fairy-like down the field. He, as he
strode firmly across, never turned at all. This spectacle of another's suffering and sacrifice
wrapped my thoughts from exclusive meditation on my own. Diana Rivers had designated her brother
inexorable as death. She had not exaggerated."